i believe that almost every disease can
be healed if we ask that question
everybody welcome to another episode of
health theory i am here with dr
christian gonzalez christian welcome to
the show man
thank you so in going ham on researching
you
i went down the gmo rabbit hole um so
i'd love to
talk more about it this is something
that i'm i'm sort of clinging uh to the
edge of having any knowledge so i'd love
to learn more
so why do they matter like you're a
health guy you're all about
i mean attacking it from a lot of
different angles so how did gmos make
your radar what began to shape your
thoughts on that yeah understanding how
important
our gut function is because when you
think about genetically modified
foods and the system that they affect
their their multi-systemic in their
effect but really they
they wreak havoc on the digestive system
and as we've known for the past
really 10 years it's been blowing up
about what are the implications of our
digestive system
for overall health and
part of the reason they came to the
public and deemed as quote unquote safe
is because
the mechanism of the way they work was
not affecting our cells human cells
but it but we find that it affects the
pathways in the gut bacteria
and the target is for effect as a
pesticide on food right outside of our
body
but that same pathway the shikamate
pathway it's called
is affected in our gut so
that's the part that's really
controversial when it comes to our
overall health
the other side of controversy it's
everywhere we don't there are
implications
in blood cancers uh liquid cancers like
leukemia which is what we're seeing
now in court right the the
billion-dollar awarding of
of um of the test of the court case with
with the
the man who had leukemia or lymphoma and
when you look
it's unfortunate because um it was
when was it three years ago uh these
emails came out
from monsanto and they showed that they
were they're very much so aware that
glyphosate causes cancer causes uh
lymphoma
affects the gut you see this in emails
between scientists warning
people within the company about what
they're seeing and
that's a big problem because the
awareness we learned when those emails
came out we learned that the company was
very much so aware of not only
does it affect people but exactly the
mechanism of how it affects folks
so the best thing i tell folks is look
why not
just just those foods if you can't even
afford organic food let's buy the ones
that
need that are doused in glyphosate let's
just buy those organic right
corn soy papaya let's get those organic
can we run down the list of ones that
are more affected than others so i know
from what i've heard things like
strawberries that have an exposed outer
area that you're going to eat that are
just sucking up the glyphosate
is going to be way worse than something
like a banana where you're going to take
the peel off
is there sort of a rough list of common
foods that are
problematic versus ones that are a
little bit safer
or do you just have sort of a whole
approach where it's like if it's gmo i
don't mess with it
um well you were referring to the
appeals with the pesticides at list by
the environmental working group that
they made
the rough thing that we can do is okay
yeah like pineapple watermelon avocados
they don't
necessarily need to be organic because
they have that protective covering even
oranges lemons limes
whereas like you were mentioning
strawberry blueberry
raspberry spinach kale but as
as as a rule of thumb let's try to go
for organic with those
so it puts us in a place where okay if
we're ingesting this one isn't going to
hurt us
maybe one a day for a month isn't going
to hurt us but over time we'll see it on
tests
that it's building up in our body and
there's known implications to those
pesticides
so are what are the tests that you would
run to check for a glyphosate is there
like a glyphosate blood test or
how do we how do we find out where we're
at on that
terrifying scale it's a good it's a good
test i think everyone should do it it's
a urine
test actually right because that's the
way the body metabolizes it there's
different companies out there labs that
do
um basically full spectrum toxin testing
um i do it for my clients once a year i
say let's just see where you're at
right because if you're pesticides it's
not just glyphosate there's
over 200 pesticide or your diet is
really lending to that
and that can have long-term implications
right so
i i the the reason i become so
passionate about environmental medicine
you know what what we're being exposed
to not only just not only from food but
the air we breathe
environmental medicine i've never heard
that term it's basically
the medicine of our outer world like
what are
exposures toxic exposures so we were
just talking about pesticides herbicide
insecticides but then
stuff in our water right heavy metals in
our
food also we didn't mention uh volatile
organic compounds in our rug in our bed
one exposure's not going to hurt you
over years it's not going to hurt you
but you have this cup that fills up
right
and the size of your cup genetically is
different than the size of my cup
and depending on how stressed we are
that's the cup will get smaller but it's
going to fill up at some point and it's
going to manifest
maybe for you you might have skin
diseases but for me i might have a lung
disease
so this is what i tell people how can we
empty the cup so let's just
let's go shopping for some organic
products versus
non-organic let's think about the rug
that we just bought is it off-gassing in
the house
um what about water quality can we
improve our water quality
air filters just small things in the
house that's basically environmental
medicine in a nutshell
so if you had to start rank ordering
this stuff like what are the
the worst ones if i if the average
person did that full panel
what are the things that come back is it
mercury poisoning that's at the top and
people need to really watch their fish
game is it
glyphosate and hey if you're eating a
plant-rich diet and i know that you're
full vegan if you're eating a plant-rich
diet are you more at risk and like yo
you really need to go hardcore on
organic if you were going to give us
sort of the top three or five ways that
people are really
getting themselves in trouble um what
are those
obviously a soft rank order yeah on the
on the test
the major ones are the whole spectrum of
pesticides including glyphosate
even for folks who are like fully
organic that we're still going to see
exposures to that
because a lot of even organic foods they
may get
uh the runoff from other farms
so food and water major entry points
major major major
bpa that's the other one that's really
high for folks on this test
and all that all of their analog bpa
coming from plastic
exactly plastic receipts um the lining
of like
tomatoes plastic thermal paper
thermal paper will have the bpa and you
can actually take that in through your
skin
it's less so through the skin and more
so that when we touch our face or touch
our mouth
so people get it on their fingers and
then they put it in their mouth
exactly talk about something that i have
never heard before i had no idea i
needed to be watching out for those okay
super interesting
yeah so i tell people all right well do
you work in retail where you're touching
receipts all day if you do wear gloves
um but you if let's say we went to whole
foods together you wouldn't see me touch
the receipt i tell them to put it in the
bag
um just for that reason because to that
knowing but also children's toys
the lining of like canned tomatoes uh or
soups
these are all things that are leaching
bpa bpa is
major hormone disruptor for men and
women i think that's the most insidious
thing
one of the most insidious toxins with
having the most amount of effect on our
body
what is the effect that bpa has is it an
estrogenizing
effect is that is it kind of like soy in
that way
close so okay uh bpa in itself is a
xenoestrogen meaning it exerts
estrogenic effect in the body
so it doesn't soy is a phytoestrogen but
it's not a female estrogen it actually
doesn't exert estrogenic effect
bpay absolutely does which is concerning
because then it's predisposing us
as men to prostate cancer women breast
cancer and some and men
ovarian cancer for women and the problem
is
bpa mimics estrogen
binds to the cell and then tells the
cell hey estrogens here
act accordingly but it's also blocking
normal healthy
binding to that receptor of other
healthy hormones
the problem with bpa is this a cdc
maybe five years ago i think it was did
a study of 2500 people
and 93 of those folks had elevated
bpa in their urine which is crazy
because
we metabolize bpa half-life is six hours
you know so basically in a day it's gone
and the biggest problem is bpa exerts
something called a non-monotonic dose
response meaning that
we know that high levels of bpa have an
effect on the body right
and the safe levels were extrapolated
from those high levels
the safe level now we see especially for
endocrine disrupting hormones
is below that safe level that we see
that's allowed it's also having an
effect on the body it's having that
estrogen
hormone disrupting effect and that's the
biggest problem um
so then i'll hear like they'll be
toxicologists saying that dose makes the
poison but it's not necessarily true
right it's partly true that's in a
vacuum but
they're not taking into account that
even low doses will have that effect
they're not taking into account how
things bio accumulate in the body
synergistic entourage effect of how they
all work together these chemicals we
don't know that so
i think i mentioned bpa because it's
i see it in tests the cdc test showed it
in a bunch of people
so i think that that's one that really
needs to be spoken about way more
okay so we've got glyphosate we've got
bpa
i didn't hear mercury on that list is
that something that you see a lot or
just going to get into that one the
heavy metals right and so the heavy
metals that we see dietarily especially
are going to be mercury cadmium arsenic
and lead
uh those are the four that are really
that show up for folks
um we get a lot of that right so
fish heavy diets are going to be
exposing you to mercury but then
rice heavy diets are going to be
exposing you to more arsenic
whereas things like cacao powder um
plant-based protein powder are going to
give you exposures to lead and cadmium
chocolate lead and cadmium cacao lead
and cadmium
so it's just a matter of like measuring
these and educating the public and being
like
here's what we can do it's it's hard
with heavy metals it's hard and here's
why the usda organic label
doesn't tell us anything about heavy
metals it tells us about pesticides and
synthetic chemicals
the heavy metal onus is on us to find
out from the company
if it's a big concern for me it's a big
concern if i have a wife she's pregnant
or i have a kid who's having smoothies
and we're putting in like a little
protein powder or some cacao because he
loves cacao
then that's a problem as a vegan how are
you approaching the food angle are there
certain stores that you shop are there
certain
foods you focus on what is what does a
day in the life look like for you i love
that i love that because it's going to
be able to empower
the the folks who are listening and
viewing um
really from the get-go it's a matter of
like when you think about
us as human beings we have incredible
detox systems right like we're so
sophisticated so how do we optimize that
are we pooping every day right are we
hydrating and peeing every day are we
sweating as much as we can or working
out every day getting that going right
okay before we move on
let's hit those individually so um
what's what's the protocol
if you're not pooping every day we'll
start with that one what do you do if
you're not
every day it's a matter of why we have
to investigate why is it a dietary thing
or do you have
to are you having too little fiber like
we have
folks who are eating still like 20 grams
of fiber which is
too low way too low but that's what
we're accepting
i think they need to go more towards 40
50. not only because it affect it helps
feed your gut
but with constipation right so i think
we need to eat more
getting in more plants as much as we can
and so we're going to get the fiber
and then you have a hit list on the
plants like if i was only going to eat
three
which is pretty close to the truth what
three would i
want to go for to maximize my bang for
buck here
i love i love raspberries because
pound for pound they're one of the top
you know you can get a whole handful and
you're getting a good amount of fiber
apples wonderful they have prebiotic
they have prebiotic effect on the body
they're going to feed the gut bacteria
and any leafy greens this is what i tell
people whatever you like some people
hate swiss chard some people love
spinach
some people love kale fiber rich leafy
greens should be
pretty much in all your plates if you
can or your smoothies um
so yeah that's the pooping part make
sure you're getting adequate hydration
for me i can drink a gallon for you
could drink a liter what's more
important for me is that you're getting
minerals right adequate minerals in your
body
um that's true hydration right that
where your cell
inside the cell and outside the cell is
quenching the perfect ratio
of minerals um so
for me i i'll i'll filter my water
and then i'll re-mineralize it because
the filtering process is going to get
rid of
any inherent minerals that are coming
from the water anyway but i think that
everyone should be re especially if
you're
filtering your water remineralizing that
so that's good
there's just mineral complexes just
dropping it in there mineral drops
i like the quicksilver kington ones qui
and ton you may have seen them
um they're little glass vials that you
just break oh my wife takes that yeah
yeah
right yeah those glass vials are amazing
they're amazing for
they taste like seawater they do because
they're
they're actually derived of purified
seawater with 78 different trace
minerals
that's a basic for health right because
minerals are the reason we
can recharge ourselves uh like we charge
our cell phones
we need minerals to as part of the
equation for charging us so
um i love them so that's really helpful
again for adequate hydration if i'm
drinking like water with no minerals i
can drink a gallon but it's
drinking a liter with adequate minerals
is gonna make a difference that's true
hydration you're getting electrolytes
and minerals in there
okay so um if you had to ball park the
amount
how much per day given that you're going
to get a ton of water from what you eat
how much do you tell people that they
should be drinking
so it depends on the person but a really
nice rule of thumb is half your body
weight and ounces
right so you know i'll drink 80
80 to 90 ounces of water a day
and waking up with a ritual of like
having 24 ounces boom right from the
get-go when you wake up
because you're your most high dehydrated
state so filling up
that water there you go you have already
you know you just have 60 ounces the
rest of the day that's why i always tell
people get a not a
plastic a stainless steel or glass water
bottle
and having that with you throughout the
day is going to be so important because
then you'll have a
you'll see you have a gauge oh damn well
today i only drank 40 ounces
let me just let me just chug 20 ounces
right now your
dehydration is like that is that is such
a big issue
that we see in folks they don't even
know they're dehydrated
so get your hydration set first right
poop as regularly those are two major
ways of detoxification
sweating you know working out it is
incredibly necessary in every single way
but part of that
necessary benefit is the detoxification
and
uh and you know moving through like that
sweat
we see it like you can measure even in
like let's say a sauna you can measure
the release of those toxins into the
into the sweat
it's amazing like you can actually
collect the sweat and see
the toxins coming out some studies that
have shown that you can see heavy metals
coming out of your sweat
in the sun but still when i tell people
you just sweat
put on a sweatshirt work out downstairs
you know just just move it
okay so those we we've got the the first
three
bowel movements sweating urine what's
next
home think about your home how do you
how do you detox your home and
and this is what i love about the
environmental working group they have a
database where you can cross
check your products that you have at
home right like
shampoo if you're like oh i don't know
about the shampoo let me just type it
into the
uh skin deep database then you'll see
well damn my shampoo gets an f why then
you'll see
allergies immunotoxicity
predisposition for cancer how it affects
the environment you'll see why it gets
the grade and then you'll see the list
of chemicals and then their
grade each individual chemical so
slowly changing our consumer goods
right soaps lotion shampoos
cologne perfume whatever we have in the
house that's a great start cleaning
supplies right
again the environmental working group
has a cleaning database where you can
type in
lysol windex bleach and then
not only that you can see better options
ranked like all the a's all the b's all
the c's
so um that's what an amazing empowering
way that we can slowly start shifting
the things out of our home and then i
think the next phase would be just
thinking about
the stuff that you're purchasing at home
you know you sleep in a bed
seven and a half eight hours a day you
know those flame retardants those
volatile organic compounds we breed them
in
so can we get a bed that is made
that that doesn't have those vocs right
is that a thing like is there a
mattress company that are there there's
so many what do you think of course
organic how is this stuff labeled
there's the o e k o t e x
o ecotex and that that ensures that they
test over 300 different chemicals
in the mattress um sustainable ethically
made and then there's the green guard
certified which is the other label
that's the
basically usda organic label of
mattresses and bed sheets and bedding
uh pillows that's what we want to look
for when we have
those type of things so like i i i
bought a brentwood home mattress
uh no affiliation with them but that's
one of the better ones
and affordable you know bed sheets okay
i'll spend another 30
on bed sheets that i'll have for a while
but i just know that they're they're
clean
you know so i think that we don't have
to be crazy hardcore we just have to
make
little shifts over time you know this is
why
we don't people don't talk enough about
environmental medicine as i was talking
because there's no
you don't just feel it immediately but
if you have let's say a child at home
who's developed asthma
and you go to your allergist and they go
okay they're allergic to pollen
and you're like okay and they're taking
the inhaler but it's not really helping
it might be because
they're rolling around in the new rug
with formaldehyde benzene and halloween
and there's known studies that show
it not only exacerbates asthma but will
induce asthma
so i think that we need to be aware of
this because unfortunately
conventionally not a lot of doctors talk
about this so it's just like that's what
i'm trying to do i'm just like let's
bring this awareness
let's empower ourselves not be scared
and make a change
yeah that that stuff is um it is really
beginning to make my radar as a
potential problem especially
as i think about cancer and you know
like
the the just ever increasing rates of
cancer that we see and how much of this
is diet related which was my first
angle of attack um which is man probably
for the last i don't know 10 or 15 years
has been how i've approached most
problems like if you have a problem i'll
just tell you right now the answer is
diet right change your diet
but environmental toxins are starting to
make my radar as a potential issue
talk to me a little bit about cancer i
know that your mom had cancer and that
sort of
changed the trajectory of your medical
career um
what what's sort of happening at the the
cutting edge of cause i think is
is probably the best place to start like
what are we you touched on glyphosate at
the beginning
um link's starting to seem pretty clear
there
um what are some other things that we
need to to really worry about
yeah i think i have like you mentioned i
had the personal experience
with cancer and i did my residency in
this integrative cancer hospital
and in that hospital i was a little
disappointed because i was like well
we're not really looking to the root
cause we're just treating
the manifestation the end stage
manifestation of what's been going on
for years
and you're right diet is huge and that
was the initial entry point i said
diet what are they what are we putting
in our body from our mouth first
and then came a point where i was seeing
people who've been super healthy dieters
for 20 years or eating very healthy
triathletes coming with pancreatic
cancer young men
young women athletes and i'm like what
is going on because i know these people
work out they eat well and then
that i started thinking as i left that
residency and working in my own practice
i said
we need to investigate so then i started
thinking about what are the pillars
you know sleep we don't talk about that
but sleep is when
our melatonin is it's highest our
melatonin is actually one of
probably the most healing when it comes
to cancer
hormones so if we're not optimizing
melatonin at night and cortisol is high
at night which is actually pushing
that cancer right and reducing our
immune function that's a problem so
that's where stress comes in
so now now we're talking nutrition
environmental medicine
sleep stress mental emotional like
there's absolutely you can't tell me
differently i've seen over 2000 cancer
patients
you can't tell me that there's not a
mental emotional part right i've seen
folks do everything right
and then they've released that trauma
from when they were a kid or a teenager
and that was the straw that broke the
camel's back that's what started the
real healing so
we got to stop thinking just like tumor
cut it out that is not the way to do
cancer medicine by any means we have to
watch
because this is what i say it's like you
come in and let's say i'm your doctor
and i'd show you a picture of a field
with a bunch of weeds and then i go all
right we're going to cut the weeds
with surgery we're going to burn the
weeds with with
chemicals radiation uh and when we're
going to
uh put chemicals on the weeds with with
chemotherapy right
so we're going to get rid of all the
weeds i promise you that or most likely
then we take a picture and
yeah it's all grass no weeds and then i
show you that and you go you go
wow i'm cancer-free and then we say go
home you understand what i'm trying to
get at the soil in itself is never
addressed and that soil has many
different factors that we were talking
about i was just talking about
and that's the problem because what i've
seen way too much of my career is
folks go home cancer free and they come
back a year later
six months later maybe two years later
and
unfortunately their cancer is more
aggressive and i know whoever's
listening i guarantee there's people who
can empathize with this because they see
this comes back more aggressive and all
of a sudden it's desensitized to the
same therapy that was given
and then it's metastasized somewhere
else in the body right so
now we have a bigger problem and a lot
and that's what happened with my mom
came back and she passed away
the problem is no one ever no one ever
even did a comprehensive hormone test to
see how she was metabolizing estrogen in
the first place
right and that she had an
estrogen-dependent cancer and there are
tests out there man like we can test
i can see your hormones right now see
how you're breaking down testosterone
see how you're breaking down estrogen if
your breakdown of estrogen is giving us
too much of that carcinogenic form of
estrogen that pushes
prostate cancer that pushes breast
cancer ovarian cancer
that's available this is why integrative
medicine and cancer is
essential for me like we all have to be
working together to optimize
these patient outcomes so
let's dive in a little bit more to
what's going on at a cellular level
that's happening to the cancer
when you talked about trauma and people
letting that go or finally dealing with
that and the real healing begins
full disclosure i want you to convince
me but i am super skeptical
if you had to translate it into
something that's happening at the
cellular level is this going back to
just the immune system is depressed
because they're constantly
going over this this trauma and the
trauma itself is causing stress and so
it's very
straightforward it's like you just have
elevated stress
and now as you deal with it that's going
down or is it something more spiritual
than that
so there's something called
transgenerational trauma
where we see when there's an experience
of a trauma in a pregnant woman or even
in a kid
there's a change in their gene it's
called nr3c1 and that gene itself
through as it's exposed to that trauma
epigenetically
the body responds and it changes the
expression
of that gene and then all of a sudden
the always and i can't handle cortisol
as efficiently as you so over time over
my life
let's say we grew up in the same
household you're my twin brother we grew
up in the same household
i had the trauma we go to we have the
same amount of stress
in college and then also we have the
same job and we have the same amount of
stress
the effect of that stress over time is
going to be much more
on my body and we know a thousand
percent that stress is a huge
contributor
to any disease chronic disease cancer
you know we know have the effect on the
immune system
we know the effect on biological aging
on
our our our whole defense system as a
whole detox everything
this is how things like working with
ptsd you can have ptsd
you can your body can adapt to that
experience but when you integrate it
you think about the inciting factor
differently
um so all of a sudden your physiology
changes around that
right because imagine like let's say you
have ptsd iptsd we're both in a war
we're constantly in a state of
fight-or-flight that epinephrine
norepinephrine cortisol is signaling
not only our immune system to be
hyperactive but over time that immune
system is going to get
exhausted it's going to go down and down
and down but what happens when we go
down and down
opportunistically those infections those
viruses latent viruses
well they they take action right other
infections take action
and on top of that those tumor cells
that are growing all of us have them
they're not being surveillance the way
they should be
and then the cascade is that usually
when we're constantly stressed our sleep
is affected
well when our sleep is affected now
we're not not now
we have a problem with melatonin not
being at a high level for us
cortisol is too high inflammatory
cytokines in our body right
inducing more inflammation to crazy
cycles
inflammation immune system depletion
infections tumor cell growth sleep
disruption
all right so let's go back to um cancer
as a
sort of cellular breakdown
i've heard you say something i've never
heard anybody else say and i'm super
curious but you said that it's basically
the body's last ditch
effort to protect itself and i've never
heard anybody talk about cancer like
that
um what is it trying to accomplish
well the way let me let me start by
saying this the way i've approached the
body for many years is that
it's more intelligent than any
oncologist any scientist anyone walking
on earth right we know how sophisticated
it is
we don't even understand the immune
system okay we kind of do
but we don't understand um so
my belief is the body has its inherent
force to heal
right the same thing like we got to cut
on our knees when we were kids we're not
still walking we
may have a scar but it's still not open
it's the intelligence was there to heal
so the way that i sort of think about
cancer is like
what is the body trying to do right
is your toxic load so so high
over life with a crappy diet um
exposures throughout your life drinking
water um
just every that whole soup and the cup
is
is filling over and you're not
detoxifying correctly is your body
creating the tumor to hold
in these or siphon in these toxins it's
something that i think we should talk
about
we're not talking we're not studying
this more um so
my thing is this is the body so
sophisticated and intelligent that it's
creating
this tumor for a reason not a
quote-unquote mistake we as
we in oncology go up the body made a
mistake right
is it a mistake or is it an adaptation
to
the conditions that it was exposed to or
given
and i think if we think about it that
way we can make
way bigger jumps in oncology by trying
to understand what the body is doing
instead of going the body's imperfect it
makes a mistake let's just cut it out
because we're smarter than it let's just
burn it let's throw chemicals at it
and now it looks fine go home you know
that's interesting i i love the way that
you're thinking about it and if you're
my oncologist there probably is a lot of
sort of
lowering of my anxiety levels to think
that it has a purpose
having said that i'm very curious to
talk about the mechanisms by which a
cell becomes cancerous
my understanding of cancer goes
something like this
you have cells and they
have a certain shelf life that evolution
has said if we don't have this shelf
life then we get cells that proliferate
too much
that actually becomes a problem so why
will humans never live forever because
cancer is the ultimate punch line to a
cell that doesn't have a pre-programmed
time of death so okay the evolution is
just that
these cells need to have a finite
lifespan
and what makes something cancerous is
when it gets
basically a mutation on a mutation that
gets it to the point where it no longer
recognizes that i'm supposed to die so
the immune system goes okay cool we have
a role to play
here is a cell that has lost the
realization that it
needs to die it's proliferating
every time it divides it passes on this
mutation on a mutation so
all of these new cells don't ever die
with programmed cell death
so the immune system is going around
looking for those and says okay this
cell
has a problem and we have to kill it
which makes all the sense in the world
about why a virus would be a problem or
ongoing stress
because now the immune system just isn't
going to catch as many and so it's more
likely to proliferate
as a tumor begins to grow obviously it
draws blood supply to itself it now
starts getting more and more robust
but all of that like it you're
so wise to say we don't understand this
well enough and so we need to open our
minds to this could be something else i
am totally on your team with that
um i'm just thinking it does seem though
like the body is
really trying to hit the brakes on
cancer before it
gets out of control yeah that's a great
that is
and the way you describe it is literally
the mechanism there is a
inciting factor over time right let's
say
um let's say oxidation
from really poor diet right poor no
antioxidants in the body over time over
time
and it's hitting that gene it's causing
the mutation in the gene
and what you said is the differentiation
step where
all of a sudden the cell's not
differentiating the way it's supposed to
and then it's propagating over and over
and over my my
only question is what is the reason it's
propagating
right and what is what is that tumor
doing right it's drawing blood supply
but why
um but i love the way you think right
because
if if we subscribe to the idea that the
body
is essentially always trying to balance
and create homeostasis
then we sort of have to understand why
it's in balance
and i always say it's like is there an
obstacle to healing and are we giving
the body what it needs to heal
those are the two i believe that almost
every disease can be healed if we ask
that question
right giving the body what it needs
those building blocks to heal
and then removing the obstacles to cure
so and the building blocks is there
anything beyond
food like are we talking about grounding
sunlight like
i think foods is the major part right
like vitamins minerals antioxidants
nutrients
but also like vitamin d we're talking
about from the sun grounding
for it um for its effects on oxidation
in the body anti-inflammatory yeah like
all of that
as a whole if you had all the money in
the world and you could run any test
that you wanted to figure out whether
um tumors have a function towards taking
us back to homeostasis in the face of
something problematic either there's
uh building blocks that are missing i'm
not my diet's totally up and
meaning it's missing something or that
either i'm eating the wrong things or
you know i'm intaking all these toxins
so uh because it's super interesting
question you're asking man so
the we take the hypothesis that the um
the
cancer is a last ditch effort to get the
body back into homeostasis in the face
of some incredible
to use my own language um what tests
would you
run to find out if that's true like what
would need to be present
in the the cancer cells themselves for
you to go i knew it there it is this is
it's trapping something or it's um
a drawing resource it's like an
immunosuppressive i'm guessing
i'm just curious like what what the
answer would need to be
that's a great question man and i think
it would start with depending on the
type of cancer that we see
uh for some hormonally driven cancers
absolutely
i would do a not only a blood hormone
test but a dried urine hormone test
which is going to be so important at
seeing like
again is your form of estrogen so high
the carcinogenic form the 4oh form is it
super high
you know we do the toxin test the heavy
metal test for sure and then i would
want to see what's
what's in the tumor if if there's the
presence of
you know any of the fat soluble toxins
are they staying in the body so
absolutely i'd be like let's do human
trials
let's take a thousand tumors and let's
just see what's in them
and let's test them for every single
known toxin in heavy metal that we have
and let's put the data together and
let's see let's see what what percentage
of folks who have this cancer this
cancer this cancer and how does it
manifest
that would be an incredible study
because i think it would advance
oncology big time right because then
essentially theoretically we may have
like a root cause that we can address
right even before it even manifests and
preventatively as a vegan oncologist who
has spoken very profoundly about the
sort of
freakish horrendous nature of food in
hospitals
what kind of diet do you put your
patients on do you
put them on a vegan diet do you let them
decide like what does that look like
it's a good question when it comes to
diet again it's bio-individual
right like my basis i use is say
how do we get more fruits and vegetables
in someone's diet period right can can
their plate be
60 fruits and vegetables variety of
colors
right because we know that these a lot
of these plant-based foods
have known anti-cancer effects right
beans legumes leafy greens what is their
anti-cancer effect what mechanism
it depends so some of them work just
purely as an antioxidant
some of them are anti-angiogenic we're
talking about the growth of the blood
vessels some will some will actually
regress the blood vessels from growing
some will actually be anti-cancer
meaning like they'll kill the tumor cell
they're actually targeting and kill the
tumor cell
turmeric like a spice that we you we can
use all the time
the anti-cancer effects more than one so
uh
starting with food how do we get in
those spices how do we get in those
fruits and vegetables all different
colors
really fast going back to the ones that
have like they are actually targeting
the
cancer cell um i'm assuming that
it's not like that thing itself makes it
into the bloodstream
so what what of those things you just
listed has that kind of aggressive
anti-cancer property
and what sort of cascade of things
triggers
that like what is it actually doing the
like for example turmeric in itself
it's byproduct or it's breakdown product
curcumin that's what we see have the
physiological effect on cancer
right so antiangiogenic it'll reduce
that signal
that's telling blood vessels you know
vegf it'll say it'll tell the blood
bloods blessings nope no more reduce it
no we don't want we don't want any more
blood glucose does it do that only to
tumors or does that do that
all across your vasculature the
beautiful thing
about a lot of these foods is that they
target
tumor cells cancer cells it's pretty
amazing and this is where i go back to
like
nature our connection with nature like
there's something
very perfect about the way nature design
stuff
we've created amazing pharmaceuticals
that can have
incredible effects on folks who need it
the most but we also have to consider
what nature does in perfection so i
always say all right
what's the type of cancer what foods
have been shown to be effective against
this cancer
what is the organ in question and how do
we support those also with these foods
um but i like no i don't make i don't
say everyone you got to go vegan
right because there's folks who actually
can benefit from
quality it's got to be quality now the
question if you're having animal
products it's got to be quality
that's the most important because
getting that conventional
meat in someone's diet when
it's conventional you'll have a higher
inflammatory profile
as a by virtue of the feed and living
conditions also
they're eating that and that's lending
to the inflammation that we don't need
right so it's they're having the
opposite effect the the what i'm trying
to say the rule of thumb
is how do we get in rainbow fruits
vegetables
you know some beans some legumes some
nuts some seeds things that we know
have a physiological effect on the body
at the very least being an antioxidant
and what do you think about cancer
metabolism
and the warburg hypothesis in terms of
cancer cells basically only being able
to metabolize glucose so
for those that have never heard of it
the warburg hypothesis is basically
uh cancer happens when the cell the
mitochondria get damaged and they can no
longer
use ketones as a fuel source and they
have to use glucose and
if the cell can truly only thrive on
glucose
then if you simply starve the body of
glucose from a diet perspective
the only glucose would be in the system
would be from
the neogenesis that occurs from protein
so you can gluconeogenesis you can turn
protein into glucose but it's actually a
relatively small amount
and so you should be able to halt or in
some cases even reverse the growth of a
tumor okay so that's the hypothesis
whether that ends up being entirely true
partly true whatever
i don't know but the the sort of first
rule of cancer club
for this only mildly educated person
would be i would cut out sugar
immediately and i would go into as
deep a state of ketosis and prolonged
fasting as i could
um but as somebody who actually deals
with patients what's your take
when it comes to ketogenic i that that's
actually a go-to diet for me for a lot
of the brain cancers
in particular so the question is like we
know that these foods have an
anti-cancer effect anti-inflammatory
effect
um they they're going to be protecting
the body they're going to be stimulating
the immune system
all these wonderful foods and the other
side of it that you're presenting is
glucose having an effect as far as
feeding the cancer cell
the thing is it's going to feed every
cell right the glucose but cancer cell
yes it will utilize that
for me i would know what i would do
immediately
is i do a fast for sure um i don't know
how long yet i always
think question if i was never get cancer
how long i would do a fast for
i would definitely do it within a safe
window but i want to see
because we know that folks who are
getting chemotherapy
and they fast it actually sensitizes the
cancer cell
to the chemotherapy and protects the
healthy cells
so fasting has a major major role when
it comes to
i'm not going to say prevention because
i'm not going to say like okay do this
and you're going to prevent cancer but
what i do for folks who go
hey look my dad had prostate cancer or
my mom had breast cancer
and i want to do everything i can
prevent i
always always check their insulin status
and their blood glucose
that's so so important that metabolic
health translates to so
so much when it comes down the road but
right now it's like
what what can we do we only know what we
have the data for
um and that's the only way to practice
safely
word christian thank you man thank you
so much for taking the time
uh there were a lot more stuff that we
definitely could have gotten into
i appreciate you diving into all this
stuff tell people where they can find
you and learn more about uh what you're
up to
cool so it's uh instagram and i put a
lot of information out there
at dlc tor.g i too have
a podcast this is where i'm at the
studio of heal myself
and um starting an online community
called the swell score
this is going to be a community where
it's going to be curated by doctors and
practitioners where we put together the
top supplements for whatever condition
so let's say you want to find the best
magnesium
we're going to hand pick the best based
on what we talk about remember we'll
talk about heavy metals
we'll have cacao powders on there that
we know have
third party testing low heavy metals so
now people don't have to be like
hey doc what do i get where do i find
this so that's the projects this is
where they can find me
awesome man thanks again guys if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe and
until
next time my friends be legendary take
care
thank you guys so much for watching and
being a part of this community if you
haven't already
be sure to subscribe you're going to get
weekly videos on building a growth
mindset cultivating grit
and unlocking your full potential